



Network Working Group                                       M. Kühlewind
Internet-Draft                                                          
Intended status: Informational                                  D. Dhody
Expires: 31 July 2024                                                   
                                                               M. Knodel
                                                         28 January 2024


   IAB Barriers to Internet Access of Services (BIAS) Workshop Report
                 draft-iab-bias-workshop-report-latest

Abstract

   The “Barriers for Internet Access of Services (Bias)” workshop was
   convened by the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) from January 15-17,
   2024 as a three-day online meeting.  Based on the submitted position
   papers, the workshop covered three areas of interest: the role of
   community networks in Internet Access of Services; reports and
   comments on the observed digital divide; and measurements of
   censorship and censorship circumvention.  This report summarizes the
   workshop's discussion and serves as a reference for reports on the
   current barriers to Internet Access.

   Note that this document is a report on the proceedings of the
   workshop.  The views and positions documented in this report were
   expressed during the workshop by participants and do not necessarily
   reflect IAB's views and positions.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://intarchboard.github.io/draft-iab-bias-workshop-report/draft-
   iab-bias-workshop-report.html.  Status information for this document
   may be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-iab-bias-
   workshop-report/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/intarchboard/draft-iab-bias-workshop-report.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 31 July 2024.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2024 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  About this workshop report content
   2.  Workshop Scope and Discussion
     2.1.  Session 1: Community Networks - Their Role in Internet
           Access of Services
       2.1.1.  Community Networks and the Quest for Quality
       2.1.2.  A ‘C’ in CDN: Access service to and from the Internet
               at cost for Community Networks
       2.1.3.  Closing the Performance and Management Gaps with
               Satellite Internet: Challenges, Approaches, and Future
               Directions
       2.1.4.  Maximising Connectivity: The Spectrum’s Vital Role in
               Technology Access
       2.1.5.  Discussion
     2.2.  Session 2: Digital Divide - Reports and Comments
     2.3.  Session 3: Censorship - Measurements
     2.4.  Conclusions
   3.  Informative References
   Appendix A.  Position Papers
   Appendix B.  Workshop Participants
   Appendix C.  Workshop Program Committee
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   The Internet as part of the critical infrastructure affects many
   aspects of our society significantly, although it impacts different
   parts of society differently.  The Internet is an important tool to
   reach the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) [SDG] and to globally
   support human rights.  Consequently, the lack of meaningful access to
   digital infrastructure and services is also a form of
   disenfranchisement.

   Solely having Internet access is not enough.  At the same time as we
   work to connect the next billion people and reduce the digital
   divide, it is also important to understand persistent and novel
   inequalities in the digital age when accessing content and services.
   There are more and more barriers to meaningful access to the services
   and applications that run on the Internet.  Even if Internet
   connectivity is available, information and services access may remain
   challenged and unequal.

   This IAB workshop has aimed

   *  to collect reports about barriers to accessing content and
      services on the Internet, e.g. based on filtering, and blocking as
      well as due to general inequality of technological capabilities,
      like device or protocol limitations.

   *  to help the Internet community get a better understanding of how
      the Internet functions in different parts of the world and which
      technology or techniques need to be used to gain access to
      content.

   *  to build an understanding of what “being connected” to the
      Internet means: What is the Internet to users?  What is needed to
      be meaningfully connected?  What are the minimum requirements to
      be able to access certain parts of the content and services
      provided over the Internet?

1.1.  About this workshop report content

   This document is a report on the proceedings of the workshop.  The
   views and positions documented in this report are expressed during
   the workshop by participants and do not necessarily reflect IAB's
   views and positions.

   Furthermore, the content of the report comes from presentations given
   by workshop participants and notes taken during the discussions,
   without interpretation or validation.  Thus, the content of this
   report follows the flow and dialogue of the workshop but does not
   attempt to capture a consensus.

2.  Workshop Scope and Discussion

   The workshop was organized across three days with all-group
   discussion slots, one per day.  The following topic areas were
   identified and the program committee organized paper submissions into
   three main themes for each of the three discussion slots.  During
   each discussion, those papers were presented sequentially with open
   discussion held at the end of each day.

2.1.  Session 1: Community Networks - Their Role in Internet Access of
      Services

   The first day of the workshop focused on the role of Community
   Networks [RFC7962] as a way to overcome the barriers to Internet
   Access.  Community Networks are self-organized networks wholly owned
   by the community and thus provide an alternative mechanism to bring
   connectivity and internet services to those places that lack
   commercial interest.

   Presentations ranged from highlighting the need for measuring Quality
   of Experience (QoE) for Community Networks, to the potential role the
   Content Delivery Network (CDN) can play in Community Networks, to the
   role of Satellite Networks, and finally, to the vital role of the
   spectrum in this space.

2.1.1.  Community Networks and the Quest for Quality

   [MARTINEZ] highlighted the need to address Quality of Experience
   (QoE) in discussions around Community Networks.  As a community-
   driven deployment, the knowledge and involvement of individuals can
   vary; therefore, there are no guarantees of connectivity or quality
   of service.  There is a need to focus on user expectations and how
   they translate to measurable performance indicators.  Further, it
   asks for better documenting best practices in deploying community
   networks as well as considering manageability considerations for
   community networks in protocol development.  [GUIFI] as an example
   Community Network was discussed and some existing resources for
   Community Networks ([APC], [ISOC], and [TBB]) were shared by the
   participants.

2.1.2.  A ‘C’ in CDN: Access service to and from the Internet at cost
        for Community Networks

   [BENSON] focused on the prohibitive cost of the transit and Internet
   service for Community Networks and argued for Content Delivery
   Networks (CDNs) to provide transit-like and Internet services at no
   more than at-cost in a mutually beneficial way.  Community networks
   still need backhaul to and from the CDN’s point of presence and
   models for community-backhaul and open-source CDNs were highlighted.
   Discussion included [PANGEA] project status as well as legal and
   commercial considerations in such use of CDNs.

2.1.3.  Closing the Performance and Management Gaps with Satellite
        Internet: Challenges, Approaches, and Future Directions

   [HU] highlighted that Satellite Internet provided by advanced LEO
   satellite constellations can play a pivotal role in closing the
   connectivity gap in the urban-rural digital divide via Satellite-
   dependent community networks.  There existing known performance and
   management gaps that need focus to enable Satellite Internet to
   resolve the divide.  Further, research directions such as multi-layer
   satellite networking, autonomous maintenance, and integration between
   Terrestrial and Non-Terrestrial networks were suggested.

2.1.4.  Maximising Connectivity: The Spectrum’s Vital Role in Technology
        Access

   [RENNO] called attention to the coveted 6GHz (part of the C-band with
   a desirable mix of coverage and capacity) as a prime choice for
   International Mobile Telecommunication (IMT) for 5G technology while
   it is in common unlicensed use in the community networks (and small
   ISPs).  Spectrum allocations directly impact industries and market
   access with ramifications for community networks.  Further, there was
   a discussion on the geopolitical tension because of it.

2.1.5.  Discussion

   How can the technical community address the management gap and
   improve best practices for Community Networks?  Is the increasing
   complexity of the Internet making it more challenging to establish
   connections, and should this be taken into account in the design of
   the Internet?  Should the manageability consideration be expanded to
   explicitly consider Community Networks?  Global Access to the
   Internet for All (GAIA) [GAIA] research group could be a venue for
   further discussion and research.  Further discussion highlighted the
   need for readily available knowledge and tools for community networks
   as well as the tussle with market forces when commercial networks
   compete with community networks.

2.2.  Session 2: Digital Divide - Reports and Comments

   TODO Session 2

2.3.  Session 3: Censorship - Measurements

   This session focused on reports of censorship as observed during
   recent years in different parts of the world, as well as on the use
   of and expectation on censorship circumvention tools, mainly the use
   of secure VPN services.

   The censorship reports, with a focus on Asia, and specifically India,
   as well as Russia, as an example where censorship has changed
   significantly recently, discussed the legal frameworks and court acts
   that put legal obligations on regional network providers to block
   traffic.  Further, measurements to validate the blocking as well as
   analyses of how blocking is implemented were discussed, i.e. which
   protocols are used but also which kind of devices are used to
   configure the blocking rules and where are they deployed.

   [SAMSUDIN] reported on confirmed blocking from 10 countries
   (Cambodia, Hong Kong (China), India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar,
   Philippines, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Vietnam) in the period from 1
   July 2022 to 30 June 2023.  The blocking was either confirmed by OONI
   measurements for existing blocking fingerprints, heuristics i.e. for
   new blocking fingerprints as well as news reports of blocking orders
   or user experiences.  Most of these countries block specific content
   such as porn, gambling, or certain news pages.  Interestingly the
   block in Hong Kong and Myanmar is focused on the military and
   governmental pages of foreign countries.  Blocking is often realized
   by either DNS tampering or HTTP tampering.  For DNS, either a decided
   IP address, a Bogon IP address (127.0.0.1), or an empty domain
   (nxdomain) is used.  In case of DNS tampering using a decided IP
   address or HTTP tampering some countries provide a block page that
   exposes the blocking, however, more transparency about blocking is
   applied as requested by civil society organizations and the iMAP
   project.

   [GROVER] further focused the discussion on online censorship in
   India, Pakistan, and Indonesia.  In India, where providers are
   responsible for implementing the blocking but no method is mandated,
   the six major ISPs (covering 98.82% of all subscribers) were tested
   on 4379 blocked websites (based on court orders, user reports, and
   publicly available or leaked government orders) on DNS poisoning/
   injection or HTTP/SNI-based censorship.  Used censorship techniques
   and websites blocked were different between ISPs.  Only one ISP used
   SNI-based blocking.  Multiple ISPs used two different techniques
   (depending on the website), and all but one provided censorship
   notices.  Providers blocked between 1892 to 3721 (of 4379) pages with
   only 1115 (27.64%) of pages blocked by all ISPs.  In contrast, e.g.
   in Pakistan the government can also order the IPSs to perform
   blocking, and blocking has even been observed in the past on the IXP
   level, however, since 2020 there is also a central Web Monitoring
   System deployed.  In Indonesia initially, the government guided ISPs,
   however, the regulation was updated in 2020 and now allows Indonesian
   ISPs to block websites at their discretion.  But there was also in
   2022 a proposal to centralise DNS.  In Indonesia, the block is
   publicly available but without any indication of why something is
   blocked.

   [BASSO] reported that for Russia a high increase in additions to the
   Roskomnadzor’s block list was observed in March 2022 as well as in
   December 2022, foremost covering news pages but also covering human
   rights organizations and social media, where more than 3500 blocking
   order are added to a list by an "Unknown body".  Further blocking of
   domains that are not in the official Roskomnadzor’s list has been
   observed as well.

   An invited talk presented the work in [WANG] on locating censorship
   devices by using HTTP and TLS traceroutes, identifying device vendors
   through fingerprinting, and reverse-engineering censorship triggers
   by use of fuzzing.  E.g. for the case of Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan,
   they showed that a significant portion of measurements from remote
   countries are blocked at the endpoint, indicating local policies but
   connection resets are also happening in Belarus and Russia.  Further,
   they could identify a set of commercial network devices (firewalls)
   that are used in these countries for censorship and show how fuzzing
   can be used to fingerprint and cluster behaviors as well as
   potentially circumvent the deployed methods.

   All speakers called for more transparency by requiring blocking
   messages as well as publication and auditing of blocklists.
   Potentially even standardization could help.

   Further on in the session, the possibility and prevalence of using
   VPNs for circumvention has been discussed including user expectations
   and an analysis of security shortcomings of commercial VPN services.
   The analysis presented in [RAMESH] has shown various problems that
   lead to data leaks such as leakage of IPv6 traffic, non-browser
   traffic, or tunnel failure, not upholding user expectations,
   especially when used in authoritarian regimes for censorship
   circumvention or private communication.

   The question of how common the use of VPNs for circumvention is and
   its legal implications, as VPNs are illegal in a few countries, has
   been discussed.  E.g.  VPNs are not officially banned in India but
   VPN providers need to store log data and those, who haven’t complied,
   stopped serving India.  However, more data on VPN use and blocking
   might be needed.

   After all, there is a cat-and-mouse game between censors and
   circumvents, however, continued work on protocol enhancements that
   protect user privacy is essential.

2.4.  Conclusions

3.  Informative References

   [APC]      "The Association for Progressive Communications (APC)",
              n.d., <https://www.apc.org/>.

   [BASSO]    Basso, S., "How Internet censorship changed in Russia
              during the 1st year of military conflict in Ukraine",
              January 2024, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/
              interim-2024-biasws-03/materials/slides-interim-2024-
              biasws-03-sessa-online-censorship-in-india-pakistan-and-
              indonesia-00>.

   [BENSON]   Benson, T. A. and M. Fayed, "A ‘C’ in CDN - Access service
              to and from the Internet at cost for community networks",
              January 2024, <https://www.ietf.org/slides/slides-biasws-
              a-c-in-cdn-access-service-to-and-from-the-internet-at-
              cost-for-community-networks-00.pdf>.

   [GAIA]     "Global Access to the Internet for All Research Group",
              n.d., <https://www.irtf.org/gaia.html>.

   [GROVER]   Grover, G., "Online censorship in India, Pakistan and
              Indonesia", January 2024,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/interim-2024-biasws-
              03/materials/slides-interim-2024-biasws-03-sessa-online-
              censorship-in-india-pakistan-and-indonesia-00>.

   [GUIFI]    "Guifi.net", n.d., <https://guifi.net/en>.

   [HU]       Hu, P., "Closing the Performance and Management Gaps with
              Satellite Internet - Challenges, Approaches, and Future
              Directions", January 2024, <https://www.ietf.org/slides/
              slides-biasws-closing-the-performance-and-management-gaps-
              with-satellite-internet-challenges-approaches-and-future-
              directions-01.pdf>.

   [ISOC]     "Community networks help bridge the connectivity gap",
              n.d., <https://www.internetsociety.org/action-plan/
              community-networks/>.

   [MARTINEZ] Martínez-Cervantes, L. M. and R. Guevara-Martínez,
              "Community Networks and the Quest for Quality", January
              2024, <https://www.ietf.org/slides/slides-biasws-
              community-networks-and-the-quest-for-quality-00.pdf>.

   [PANGEA]   "Project Pangea from Cloudflare", n.d.,
              <https://www.cloudflare.com/en-gb/pangea/>.

   [RAMESH]   Ramesh, R., "Investigating the VPN Ecosystem through the
              lens of Security, Privacy, and Usability", January 2024,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/interim-2024-biasws-
              03/materials/slides-interim-2024-biasws-03-sessa-
              investigating-the-vpn-ecosystem-through-the-lens-of-
              security-privacy-and-usability-00>.

   [RENNO]    Rennó, R., "Maximising Connectivity - The Spectrum's Vital
              Role in Technology Access", January 2024,
              <https://www.ietf.org/slides/slides-biasws-position-paper-
              by-raquel-renno-01.pdf>.

   [RFC7962]  Saldana, J., Ed., Arcia-Moret, A., Braem, B.,
              Pietrosemoli, E., Sathiaseelan, A., and M. Zennaro,
              "Alternative Network Deployments: Taxonomy,
              Characterization, Technologies, and Architectures",
              RFC 7962, DOI 10.17487/RFC7962, August 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7962>.

   [SAMSUDIN] Samsudin, S., "iMAP (Internet Monitoring Action Project)
              2023 Internet Censorship Report", January 2024,
              <https://www.ietf.org/slides/slides-biasws-position-paper-
              by-raquel-renno-01.pdf>.

   [SDG]      "Sustainable Development Goals", n.d.,
              <https://sdgs.un.org/goals>.

   [TBB]      "Tribal Broadband Bootcamp", n.d.,
              <https://tribalbroadbandbootcamp.org/>.

   [WANG]     Raman, R. S., Wang, M., Dalek, J., Mayer, J., and R.
              Ensafi, "Network Measurement Methods for Locating and
              Examining Censorship Devices", November 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/interim-2024-biasws-
              03/materials/slides-interim-2024-biasws-03-sessa-online-
              censorship-in-india-pakistan-and-indonesia-00>.

Appendix A.  Position Papers

   19 position papers were submitted to the workshop call for papers. 11
   were selected for publication.  Papers that were not published either
   (2) only provided a very prelimited analysis of an idea that was felt
   to be incomprehensive for discussion at the workshop, or addressed
   problems that were beyond the scope as dedicated for the workshop
   discussion e.g. discussing cyber security threads as a barrier for
   participation or implication of technology in regulation that imposes
   blocking.  Both of these topics pose a potentially severe risk on the
   open Internet, however, these risks might provide a high risk for all
   Internet users but do not necessarily imply an unbalance.

   All accepted papers are available at:
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/group/biasws/materials/

   This is the list of all published papers:

   Community Networks:

   *  L.  M.  Martínez-Cervantes, R.  Guevara-Martínez: Community
      Networks and the Quest for Quality

   *  T.  Benson, M.  Fayed: A ‘C’ in CDN: Access service to and from
      the Internet for community networks at-cost

   *  P.  Hu: Closing the Performance and Management Gaps with Satellite
      Internet: Challenges, Approaches, and Future Directions

   *  R.  Rennó: Maximising Connectivity: The Spectrum's Vital Role in
      Technology Access

   Digital Divide:

   *  R.  Holz, N.  Nazemi, O.  Tavallaie, A.Y.  Zomaya: Evidence for a
      digital divide?  Measuring DNS dependencies in the context of the
      indigenous population of Australia

   *  S.  Hussain: Universal Acceptance of Domain Names and Email
      Addresses: A Key to Digital Inclusion

   *  R.  Habib, S.  Tanveer, A.  Inam, H.  Ahmed, A.  Ali, Z.A.  Uzmi,
      Z.A.  Qazi, I.A.  Qazi: A Framework for Improving Web
      Affordability and Inclusiveness

   *  J.  Ott, G.  Bartolomeo, M.M.  Bese, R.  Bose, M.  Bosk, D.
      Guzman, L.  Kärkkäinen, M.  Kosek, N.  Mohan: The Internet: Only
      for the Fast (and Furious)?

   *  L.Y.  Ohlsen: BIAS workshop - M-Lab Position Paper submission

   Censorship:

   *  S.  Nurliza Samsudin: iMAP (Internet Monitoring Action Project)
      2023 Internet Censorship Report

   *  G.  Grover: The infrastructure of censorship in Asia

   *  S.  Basso: How Internet censorship changed in Russia during the
      1st year of military conflict in Ukraine

   In addition to the submitted paper two invited talks were presented
   based on published papers:

   *  R.  Sundara Raman, M.  Wang, J.  Dalek, J.  Mayer, R.  Ensafi:
      Network Measurement Methods for Locating and Examining Censorship
      Devices

   *  R.  Ramesh, A.  Vyas, R.  Ensafi: “All of them claim to be the
      best”: A multi-perspective study of VPN users and VPN providers

Appendix B.  Workshop Participants

   TODO Workshop Participants

Appendix C.  Workshop Program Committee

   The workshop program committee members were Christopher Wood (IAB,
   Cloudflare), Dhruv Dhody (IAB, Huawei), Mallory Knodel (IAB, Center
   for Democracy and Technology), Mirja Kühlewind (IAB, Ericsson), and
   Tommy Pauly (IAB, Apple).

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Mirja Kühlewind
   Email: ietf@kuehlewind.net


   Dhruv Dhody
   Email: dd@dhruvdhody.com


   Mallory Knodel
   Email: mknodel@cdt.org
